TITLE: Influenza: A complex biography, and why we should care

SECTION 1:

“The flu” has been trivialized for decades. The term has been used for as wide a range of issues as: 
 - a stomach bug - the “common cold” - any illness during the winter season - the actual flu: an infection from a member of the influenza virus family. 
This trivialization has led to dangerous dismissiveness in the face of new influenza research.  It is only recently, in the face of the current COVID-19 pandemic, that the general public has begun to recall just how devastating an influenza pandemic can be.

Influenza is a virus - a packet of genetic material that hijacks its host’s cellular replication system in order to reproduce. Alone, viruses are simply made of proteins, and either DNA or RNA. Viruses need hosts in order to reproduce, but those hosts don’t necessarily have to be human, depending on the virus. 

SECTION 2: 

Influenza is an RNA virus, meaning that it releases its RNA into its host’s cells. Then, the host’s cells start producing influenza’s RNA and proteins, and assembles influenza virus cells that then flood forth to continue infecting more cells within the host. 
 Another quality of RNA viruses is that they tend to have a high mutation rate - their replication is more likely to have mistakes, leading to changes in their proteins that make it difficult for the host’s immune system to recognize the invaders.
 For influenza, this means that the proteins, which are called H and N proteins, change just enough to be unfamiliar to the human body, so our immune systems don’t necessarily catch the infection immediately. For medical vocabulary enthusiasts, this is called antigenic drift.
  Another way that viruses can change is when two different strains of the virus meet in one host, and exchange or recombine proteins, making a whole new virus. These viruses are very difficult for the immune system to recognize, which can lead to dramatic changes in the virus-host relationship - like an epidemic. For the medical vocabulary enthusiasts, this is called antigenic shift.

SECTION 3:
 The last important concept about influenza’s relationship with its hosts is referred to as a spillover event. Simply, a spillover event is when a virus that infects animals “spills over” into the human population. This is why there are strains of influenza referenced as “avian flu,” “bird flu”  and “swine flu.”



QUOTE: “Influenza A viruses primarily target and infect airway and alveolar epithelial cells … thus causing alveolar epithelial injury and eventually failure of gas exchange. Hence, human IAV infection may lead to acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) and even death.”  - Xiaoyong Chen et al. “Host Immune Response to Influenza A Virus Infection,” Frontiers in immunology vol. 9, article 320. 5 Mar. 2018, doi:10.3389/fimmu.2018.00320. Page 2.
