TITLE: Recent Pandemics

SECTION 1:

The 1889-1893 Pandemic The earliest of what one might call the “modern” influenza pandemics began in 1889. Nicknamed the “Russian flu” and the “Asiatic flu” due to its perceived origins in Russia, this pandemic stunned 19th century scientists and physicians by sweeping across the world, leaving swaths of dead people in its wake. This pandemic’s spread was visibly tied to the growing industrialized centers of the 18th century and the increasing mobility of the world populace due to trains and steam ships. Global cases and mortality numbers are unknown, but in London, there were 2,258 more deaths in one month than the average death rate per month, most of which were attributed to influenza or respiratory diseases like pneumonia and bronchitis. The outbreak ebbed and flowed after the first two years of the outbreak, finally fading away in 1893. 

SECTION 2:

The 1918-1920 Pandemic
The world was preoccupied when the first people fell ill in 1918 - preoccupied with war.
The United States entered World War I in April 1917. Eleven months later, the very first reports of flu outbreaks appeared at Camp Funston, in Fort Riley, Kansas. Two months later, in May, 1918, hundreds of thousands of soldiers flooded from the U.S. into Europe, landing in France in order to join World War I.

By the end of the flu season in early 1920, less than two years since the pandemic began, upwards of 50 million million people died, worldwide, and some modern researchers believe that the number of deaths may have been closer to 100 million people.

In Philadelphia:
"The city morgue had room for thirty-six bodies. Two hundred were stacked there. The stench was terrible; doors and windows were thrown open. No more bodies could fit. Bodies lay in homes where they died, as they died, often with bloody liquid seeping from the nostrils or mouths. ... In much of the city, a city more short on housing than New York, people had no room that could be close off. Corpses were wrapped in sheets, pushed into corners, left there sometimes for days, the horror of it sinking in deeper each hour, people too sick to cook for themselves, too sick to clean themselves, too sick to move the corpse off the bed, lying alive on the same bed with the corpse. The dead lay there for days, while the living lived with them, were horrified by them, and, perhaps most horribly, became accustomed to them. 
"Symptoms were terrifying. Blood poured from noses, ears, eye sockets; some victims lay in agony; delirium took others away while living..." P223-224, Barry.

Outside of the harrowing experiences of the general public, scientists raced to attempt to identify the cause of the outbreak. The early prevailing opinion was that the pandemic was caused by a bacillus, a bacteria, that was believed to have caused the 1889 flu pandemic. At the time, it was impossible to see a virus through a microscope, and there seemed to be a correlation between victims of the pandemic and appearances of "Pfeiffer's bacillus," now known as Haemophilus influenzae.

One of these scientists was a man named Paul Adin Lewis, who had joined the U.S. Navy for World War I. A lifelong scientific researcher, Lewis had already made history in the field of medical science by proving that polio was caused by a virus. In 1918, Lewis had little more than horrific reports, a loose hypothesis and innumerable amounts of biological samples, but was facing a race for cures that he could not find.

As the fatalities increased, hundreds of scientists joined the search for a cause, a vaccine or a cure. Other important figures in this search included William Park and Anna Williams, who eventually reversed their early positions on the causes of influenza as Pfeiffer's bacillus in order to stand against it, Oswald Avery, who had devoted his life to the study of pneumonia and whose research eventually proved that DNA carried a cells' genetic code, and William Henry Welch, the founder of Johns Hopkins' School of Hygiene and Public Health and one of the founders of the Johns Hopkins Hospital.

But Lewis, who had begun his hunt for the causes of influenza with the belief that it might be a virus, whose belief had been changed by the appearance of a causal link between Pfeiffer's bacillus and the influenza epidemic, struggled after the close of the pandemic.  His research failed repeatedly, and his personal life foundered as well. He began working with a younger researcher, Richard Edwin Shope, and refocused his work on new infectious diseases. With Shope, Lewis was still working on influenza research, but the two men also worked on tuberculosis research and the investigation that would end Lewis' life - Yellow Fever.

In 1928, a decade after the beginning of the 1918 influenza pandemic, Lewis traveled to Brazil in order to study a particularly virulent outbreak of Yellow Fever. Back in the U.S., Shope continued their influenza research.

Less than a year later, Lewis was dead, infected by the very disease that he had gone to Brazil to study. 

In 1931, Shope published three papers, in one of which he listed Lewis as the lead author. All three papers were about influenza, and they were the crowning achievement of the Lewis-Shope team. 

Shope had proven that the cause of influenza in swine was a virus. Later, he would show a distinct connection between that influenza virus and the 1918 influenza virus. His work would allow three British scientists to isolate a human influenza virus for the first time in 1933.

More than a decade later, the 1918 influenza epidemic allowed medical science to prove that influenza was, in fact, caused by the influenza virus.


RIGHT COLUMN INFOBOX:
Why "Spanish Flu?"
The 1918 influenza outbreak is often referenced as the "Spanish Flu," leading to the question - was the outbreak from Spain?
No, the 1918 influenza pandemic was almost definitely not from Spain. Current scientific research supports the hypothesis that the influenza pandemic likely began in Kansas.
So why the "Spanish Flu?"
The pandemic began at the end of World War I. During the war, most of the participating countries - including the U.S., the U.K., France, Austria-Hungary and Germany - were censoring their press. Spain, a country that did not significantly participate in World War I, was not censoring their press for morale's sake. As a result, their newspapers were the first to report on the 1918 outbreak, leading to the illusion that Spain had been struck first. 

SECTION 3:

Other influenza outbreaks: 1957-8 and 1968-9 (“Asian” and “Hong Kong”)
Throughout the 20th century, the fear of another overwhelming influenza pandemic remained prevalent. After World War II, and as the Cold War intensified, American fears grew to include a prominent conspiracy theory - that Communist countries were planning to create a deadly influenza virus in a lab, and to release said virus as a biowarfare agent against the "free world."

The colloquial names for the two largest influenza pandemics of the second half of the 20th century bear out this paranoia: the "Asian flu" and the "Hong Kong flu." 

These outbreaks, in 1957 and 1968 respectively, may or may not have originated in the locations with which they are associated. As recent research revolving around the 1918 pandemic has proven, initial perceptions about the origins of a pandemic may be disastrously incorrect.

The 1957 influenza pandemic was caused by the H2N2 influenza virus, and is believed to have originated in Guizhou, China. It is also believed to have originated as a recombination of the virus by an avian influenza strain and a human influenza strain. This strain was particularly lethal to pregnant women, the elderly, and those with pre-existing exacerbating conditions, and children had the highest survival rate. This strain of H2N2 continued to circulate until it transformed into H3N2 in 1968, causing the influenza pandemic. (See antigenic shiftLINK)
The 1968 outbreak, which was caused by the H3N2 influenza virus as described above, was significantly less lethal than its predecessors, causing an estimated 1 million deaths, globally. 


SECTION 4:

The 2009-2010 Swine Flu pandemic

In 2009, a new version of the H1N1 influenza virus overwhelmed the world, panicking many and lasting for a little more than a year. Scientists marked this outbreak as unique in part due to its unusual impact range. The 2009 influenza outbreak did not appear to be significantly more lethal to the elderly, children, or persons with pre-existing exacerbating conditions.

The 2009 influenza pandemic is also known as the "Swine Flu" pandemic, due to its origins. As discussed in the definition of spillover (LINK), it is not uncommon for influenza to move between humans and other animals, particularly birds and pigs. In the case of the 2009 pandemic, the H1N1 influenza virus that caused the pandemic is believed to have moved to infecting humans from pigs - hence, "Swine Flu."

There have been several of other influenza epidemics in the past century, but the 2009 outbreak looms large in American memory, while other outbreaks languish in obscurity in America due to their geographical impact being restricted to locations outside of America and in places with high poverty rates and small populations of people of European descent. 